[red-knot] Initial tests for instance attributes (#15474)
astral-sh/ruff: crates/red_knot_python_semantic/resources/mdtest/attributes.md

Tests for attribute access on various kinds of types.

## Class and instance variables

### Pure instance variables

#### Variable only declared/defined in `__init__`

> Variables only defined in `__init__` are pure instance variables. They can not be accessed on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Variables only defined in `__init__` are pure instance variables. They cannot be accessed on the
```

class itself.

```py
class C:
    def __init__(self, value2: int) -> None:
        self.pure_instance_variable1 = "value set in __init__"
        self.pure_instance_variable2 = value2

>         self.pure_instance_variable3: bytes

Reviewer: For completeness, maybe you could also have an `__init__` instance variable that is explicitly declared on assignment and is bound to a value?

```suggestion
        self.pure_instance_variable3: bytes
        self.pure_instance_variable4: bytes = b"Declared and bound"
```

I suppose it might also be good to have an instance attribute that's possible unbound as well, e.g.

```py
class C:
    def __init__(self, flag: bool):
        if flag:
            self.x: str = "oh no"
```

c_instance = C(1)

# TODO: should be `Literal["value set in __init__"]` (or `str` which would probably be more generally useful)
reveal_type(c_instance.pure_instance_variable1)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)

# TODO: should be `int`
reveal_type(c_instance.pure_instance_variable2)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)

# TODO: should be `bytes`
reveal_type(c_instance.pure_instance_variable3)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)

c_instance.pure_instance_variable1 = "value set on instance"

# TODO: this should be an error (incompatible types in assignment)
c_instance.pure_instance_variable2 = "incompatible"

# TODO: we already show an error here but the message might be improved?
# mypy shows no error here, but pyright raises "reportAttributeAccessIssue"
# error: [unresolved-attribute] "Type `Literal[C]` has no attribute `pure_instance_variable1`"
reveal_type(C.pure_instance_variable1)  # revealed: Unknown

> # TODO: this should be an error (pure instance variables can not be accessed on the class)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# TODO: this should be an error (pure instance variables cannot be overwritten on the class)
```

# mypy shows no error here, but pyright raises "reportAttributeAccessIssue"
C.pure_instance_variable1 = "overwritten on class"

> # TODO: should ideally be `Literal["value set on instance"]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# TODO: should ideally be `Literal["value set on instance"]`
# (due to earlier assignment of the attribute from the global scope)
```

reveal_type(c_instance.pure_instance_variable1)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)
```

#### Variable declared in class body and defined in `__init__`

The same rule applies even if the variable is *declared* (not defined!) in the class body: it is
still a pure instance variable.

```py
class C:
    pure_instance_variable: str

    def __init__(self) -> None:
        self.pure_instance_variable = "value set in __init__"

c_instance = C()

> # TODO: should be `Literal["value set in __init__"]` (or `str` which would probably be more generally useful)

Reviewer: I think the explicit declaration in the class body here makes it unambiguous that the public type (the type seen from other scopes) should be `str` rather than a `Literal` type

reveal_type(c_instance.pure_instance_variable)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)

# TODO: we currently plan to emit a diagnostic here. Note that both mypy
# and pyright show no error in this case! So we may reconsider this in
# the future, if it turns out to produce too many false positives.
reveal_type(C.pure_instance_variable)  # revealed: str

# TODO: same as above. We plan to emit a diagnostic here, even if both mypy
# and pyright allow this.
C.pure_instance_variable = "overwritten on class"

# TODO: this should be an error (incompatible types in assignment)
c_instance.pure_instance_variable = 1
```

#### Variable declared in class body and defined in unrelated method

> We also recognize pure instance variables if they are defined in a method that is not `__init__`.

Reviewer 2: Not saying we shouldn't but this will require traversing the entire class body. This could be somewhat expensive (at least it's more expensive than only doing so for `__init__`). 

* Does that include accesses inside of nested classes, functions or lambdas? 
* Does this include accesses where the variable isn't self

```py
class C:
	pure_instance_variable: str
	
	def test(self, other: Self, value: str):
		other.pure_instance_variable = value
```

Reviewer: Mypy and pyright both support this, so I think we have to, expensive though it may be. Users will expect their type checker to support this and will complain if it doesn't. It's also unfortunately reasonably common in Python to do things like

```py
class Foo:
    def __init__(self):
        self.initialize_x_variable()

    def initialize_x_variable(self):
        # many lines of complicated logic
        self.x = 42
```

> * Does that include accesses inside of nested classes, functions or lambdas?
> 
> * Does this include accesses where the variable isn't self

I think we probably don't need to support these, certainly not initially

Reviewer: We can also experiment with varying degrees of laziness here. For first-party code that we're actually checking, I think we'll probably need to know all instance attributes of every class. But for third-party/stdlib code that our first-party code is interacting with, it often probably isn't necessary to know what instance attributes the class has and, even if it is, it might not be necessary to materialize the _full set_ of instance attributes the class has. For something like the following, we could plausibly short-circuit if we find the `foo` attribute defined in `__init__` or `__new__`, and not bother analyzing the other methods the `SomeClass` defines:

```py
from third_party import SomeClass

x = SomeClass()
print(x.foo + 5)  # all we need to know here is whether `SomeClass` has a `foo` attribute
                  # and what its type is
```

```py
class C:
    pure_instance_variable: str

    def set_instance_variable(self) -> None:
        self.pure_instance_variable = "value set in method"

c_instance = C()

# for a more realistic example, let's actually call the method
c_instance.set_instance_variable()

# TODO: should be `str`
reveal_type(c_instance.pure_instance_variable)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)

# TODO: See above, we currently plan to emit diagnostics for both of these lines,
# even if mypy/pyright do not.
reveal_type(C.pure_instance_variable)  # revealed: str
C.pure_instance_variable = "overwritten on class"
```

> ### Pure class variables (`ClassVar`)

Reviewer: you could also possibly include an example of a `ClassVar` attribute being overridden on a subclass with a consistent subtype, since this is one of the ways in which `ClassVar` class variables differ from `Final` class variables

#### Annotated with `ClassVar` type qualifier

Class variables annotated with the [`typing.ClassVar`] type qualifier are pure class variables. They
can not be accessed on instances.

```py
from typing import ClassVar

class C:
    pure_class_variable: ClassVar[str] = "value in class body"

> reveal_type(C.pure_class_variable)  # revealed: str

Reviewer: ahh... a test that actually passes already 🎉 😆

c_instance = C()

# TODO: This should be `str`. It is okay to access a pure class variable on an instance.
reveal_type(c_instance.pure_class_variable)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)

# TODO: should raise an error. It is not allowed to reassign a pure class variable on an instance.
c_instance.pure_class_variable = "value set on instance"

C.pure_class_variable = "overwritten on class"

# TODO: should ideally be `Literal["overwritten on class"]`, but not a priority
reveal_type(C.pure_class_variable)  # revealed: str

# TODO: should raise an error (incompatible types in assignment)
C.pure_class_variable = 1
```

#### Variable only mentioned in a class method

We also consider a class variable to be a pure class variable if it is only mentioned in a class

> method.

Reviewer: I think it would be reasonable in that case to complain about ambiguity if we're in strict mode, and demand an explicit annotation in the class body.

If strict mode is disabled, I guess we have to assume it's an instance variable with a class-level default?

> method.

Reviewer 2: The current CLI proposal doesn't propose a strict mode. But it could be rule that warns about this.

> method.

Author: > What's the expected behavior if a variable is used both in a `@classmethod` and a regular method?

I'll leave this test case out for now, but I added a note in the PR description (which will eventually serve as a TODO list for me)

```py
class C:
    @classmethod
    def class_method(cls):
        cls.pure_class_variable = "value set in class method"

# for a more realistic example, let's actually call the method
C.class_method()

> # TODO: mypy shows an error here, pyright does not. What should we do?

Reviewer: (I vote for pyright's behaviour here, especially if we infer instance attributes even when they're assigned in non-`__init__`/`__new__` methods)

# error: [unresolved-attribute]
reveal_type(C.pure_class_variable)  # revealed: Unknown

C.pure_class_variable = "overwritten on class"

# TODO: should be `Literal["overwritten on class"]`
# error: [unresolved-attribute]
reveal_type(C.pure_class_variable)  # revealed: Unknown

c_instance = C()
# TODO: should be `Literal["overwritten on class"]` or `str`
reveal_type(c_instance.pure_class_variable)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)

# TODO: should raise an error.
c_instance.pure_class_variable = "value set on instance"
```

> ### "Regular" class variables

Reviewer: I think this subheading is a bit confusing -- these aren't class variables at all; they're instance variables that just happen to have a default in the class body. Though it's a bit wordier, I'd go with

```suggestion
### Instance variables with class-level default values
```

or

```suggestion
### Instance variables with default values in the class body
```

Author: "Regular class variable" is the term used in pyright's docu. I'm okay with deviating from that. I agree that it's slightly confusing.

These are instance attributes, but the fact that we can see that they have a definition (not just a
declaration) in the class body means that reading the value from the class body is also permitted.

> This is the only difference for these attributes as opposed to "pure" instance attributes.

Author: Wording stolen from @AlexWaygood

Reviewer: Though @carljm pointed out that the word "binding" here might be better than "definition"

#### Basic

```py
class C:

>     regular_class_variable: str = "value in class body"

Reviewer: same as my comment above about the subheading, I think calling this variable `regular_class_variable` is somewhat confusing, as this category really has more in common with "pure" instance variables than with pure class variables

    def instance_method(self):
        self.regular_class_variable = "value set in instance method"

    @classmethod
    def class_method(cls):

>         cls.regular_class_variable = "value set in class method"

Reviewer 2: Should this be an error because the documentation only mentions that *reading the value from the class body is also permitted*?

Reviewer: For this specific example, I think so, yes. The `: str` annotation in the class body explicitly declares that this is an instance attribute rather than a class attribute, so it shouldn't be writable from the class, only from instances. The only way it should differ from "pure" instance variables is that it's readable from the class as well as from instances.

Where it gets muddier is if the variable is unannotated. What do we do for something like this?

```py
class Foo:
    X = 42

Foo.X = 56
```

To a human who can see the whole code holistically (including how it's used from outside the class scope), it's pretty clear here that `Foo.X` is meant to be a class variable. But red-knot won't be able to see the uses of the variable from outside the class when it's doing its initial analysis of the set of instance and class attributes, and there's no annotation here to help us figure out whether this should be inferred as a class variable or an instance variable with a class-level default. Nor are there any uses of the variable in the class's classmethods or instance methods to help us out.

I don't have a great answer for this right now. Curious if anybody else has thoughts for how we could avoid false positives here.

Author: > Should this be an error because the documentation only mentions that _reading the value from the class body is also permitted_?

Yes. I removed this method for now. I think the behavior should be the same as from outside the class, so this should be an error.

Tests for attribute access on various kinds of types.

## Class and instance variables

### Pure instance variables

#### Variable only declared/defined in `__init__`

Variables only defined in `__init__` are pure instance variables. They cannot be accessed on the
class itself.

```py
class C:
    def __init__(self, value2: int, flag: bool = False) -> None:
        # bound but not declared
        self.pure_instance_variable1 = "value set in __init__"

        # bound but not declared - with type inferred from parameter
        self.pure_instance_variable2 = value2

        # declared but not bound
        self.pure_instance_variable3: bytes

        # declared and bound
        self.pure_instance_variable4: bool = True

>         # possibly unbdeclared/unbound

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        # possibly undeclared/unbound
```

# the future, if it turns out to produce too many false positives.
reveal_type(C.pure_instance_variable)  # revealed: str

# TODO: same as above. We plan to emit a diagnostic here, even if both mypy
# and pyright allow this.
C.pure_instance_variable = "overwritten on class"

# TODO: this should be an error (incompatible types in assignment)
c_instance.pure_instance_variable = 1
```

#### Variable declared in class body and defined in unrelated method

We also recognize pure instance variables if they are defined in a method that is not `__init__`.

```py
class C:
    pure_instance_variable: str

    def set_instance_variable(self) -> None:
        self.pure_instance_variable = "value set in method"

c_instance = C()

# for a more realistic example, let's actually call the method
c_instance.set_instance_variable()

# TODO: should be `str`
reveal_type(c_instance.pure_instance_variable)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)

# TODO: See above, we currently plan to emit diagnostics for both of these lines,
# even if mypy/pyright do not.
reveal_type(C.pure_instance_variable)  # revealed: str
C.pure_instance_variable = "overwritten on class"
```

> ### Pure class variables (`ClassVar`)

Reviewer: one more case that might be worth adding is the case where a variable is annotated with "bare" `ClassVar` -- here we know that it's a pure class variable, but we still have to infer the type!

```py
class Foo:
    X: ClassVar = 42  # `int`, `Unknown`, `Literal[42]`, or `Unknown | Literal[42]`?
```

#### Annotated with `ClassVar` type qualifier

Class variables annotated with the [`typing.ClassVar`] type qualifier are pure class variables. They

> cannot be overwritten on instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cannot be overwritten on instances, but can be read from instances.
```

Tests for attribute access on various kinds of types.

## Class and instance variables

### Pure instance variables

#### Variable only declared/bound in `__init__`

Variables only declared and/or bound in `__init__` are pure instance variables. They cannot be
accessed on the class itself.

```py
class C:
    def __init__(self, value2: int, flag: bool = False) -> None:
        # bound but not declared
        self.pure_instance_variable1 = "value set in __init__"

        # bound but not declared - with type inferred from parameter
        self.pure_instance_variable2 = value2

        # declared but not bound
        self.pure_instance_variable3: bytes

        # declared and bound
        self.pure_instance_variable4: bool = True

        # possibly undeclared/unbound
        if flag:
            self.pure_instance_variable5: str = "possibly set in __init__"

c_instance = C(1)

> # TODO: should be `Literal["value set in __init__"]` (or `str` which would probably be more generally useful)

Reviewer: > if the only assignment to `self.pure_instance_variable1` that occurs anywhere in the class is `self.pure_instance_variable1 = "value set in __init__"`, then why _wouldn't_ you want it typed as `Literal["value set in __init__"]`? Just to accommodate external code setting it to some other value?

Subclasses also won't be able to assign a non-subtype to the attribute

> That seems like an edge case

Hmm, I don't agree. I think it's quite common for code to only assign an instance variable in the `__init__` method of the class, but with the intention that it should be possible to reassign the attribute from other scopes.

> and not too much to ask you to add an explicit `: str` if that's what you wanted.

Surely that violates the gradual guarantee? And this doesn't seem to tackle at all the problem of typed code interacting with untyped third-party code, which may be unwilling to add type annotations in a timely manner?

I'm leaning towards either `Unknown | Literal[...]` or `Unknown | str` for cases like these. Haven't made my mind up about which is preferable there (haven't thought too deeply about it yet!)

> # TODO: should be `Literal["value set in __init__"]` (or `str` which would probably be more generally useful)

Reviewer 3: > Surely that violates the gradual guarantee

Yes, but so does widening the literal type to `str`.

I like the idea of a union with `Unknown` for inferred attribute types! I think that is the principled gradual-guarantee approach here. It will be more forgiving than what people are used to, but I generally like it if we take the gradual guarantee more seriously than existing type checkers: if you want more strictness, annotate.

(I don't see why we would special-case converting it to `Unknown | str` instead of `Unknown | Literal[...]` if we're unioning with `Unknown` -- I think the union already takes care of the problematic aspects of the literal inference, by allowing you to assign anything wide.)

# TODO: should be `Literal["possibly set in __init__"]` (or `str`)
# We probably don't want to emit a diagnostic for this being possibly undeclared/unbound.
# mypy and pyright do not show an error here.
reveal_type(c_instance.pure_instance_variable5)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)

c_instance.pure_instance_variable1 = "value set on instance"

# TODO: this should be an error (incompatible types in assignment)
c_instance.pure_instance_variable2 = "incompatible"

# TODO: we already show an error here but the message might be improved?
# mypy shows no error here, but pyright raises "reportAttributeAccessIssue"
# error: [unresolved-attribute] "Type `Literal[C]` has no attribute `pure_instance_variable1`"
reveal_type(C.pure_instance_variable1)  # revealed: Unknown

# TODO: this should be an error (pure instance variables cannot be accessed on the class)
# mypy shows no error here, but pyright raises "reportAttributeAccessIssue"
C.pure_instance_variable1 = "overwritten on class"

# TODO: should ideally be `Literal["value set on instance"]`
# (due to earlier assignment of the attribute from the global scope)

> reveal_type(c_instance.pure_instance_variable1)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)

Reviewer: We've had this conversation several times now 😆 I still favour the more pragmatic behaviour of mypy and pyright over the stricter behaviour of pyre here. But yeah, we can debate the details at a later stage

The same rule applies even if the variable is *declared* (not bound!) in the class body: it is still
a pure instance variable.

```py
class C:
    pure_instance_variable: str

    def __init__(self) -> None:
        self.pure_instance_variable = "value set in __init__"

c_instance = C()

# TODO: should be `str`
reveal_type(c_instance.pure_instance_variable)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)

# TODO: we currently plan to emit a diagnostic here. Note that both mypy
# and pyright show no error in this case! So we may reconsider this in
# the future, if it turns out to produce too many false positives.
reveal_type(C.pure_instance_variable)  # revealed: str

# TODO: same as above. We plan to emit a diagnostic here, even if both mypy
# and pyright allow this.
C.pure_instance_variable = "overwritten on class"

# TODO: this should be an error (incompatible types in assignment)
c_instance.pure_instance_variable = 1
```

#### Variable only defined in unrelated method

We also recognize pure instance variables if they are defined in a method that is not `__init__`.

```py
class C:
    def set_instance_variable(self) -> None:

>         self.pure_instance_variable: str = "value set in method"

Reviewer: nit: I'd either remove the annotation, or also add an example without an annotation, because otherwise I think this could be seen to imply that we intend to only infer the instance attribute on non-`__init__`-method assignments if the attribute is declared as well as bound in the non-`__init__`-method

instance variable and allow access to it via instances.

```py
class C:
    pure_instance_variable: str

c_instance = C()

# TODO: should be 'str'
reveal_type(c_instance.pure_instance_variable)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)

# TODO: mypy and pyright do not show an error here, but we plan to emit a diagnostic.
# The type could be changed to 'Unknown' if we decide to emit an error?
reveal_type(C.pure_instance_variable)  # revealed: str

# TODO: mypy and pyright do not show an error here, but we plan to emit one.
C.pure_instance_variable = "overwritten on class"
```

### Pure class variables (`ClassVar`)

#### Annotated with `ClassVar` type qualifier

Class variables annotated with the [`typing.ClassVar`] type qualifier are pure class variables. They
cannot be overwritten on instances, but they can be accessed on instances.

For more details, see the [typing documentation on `ClassVar`].

```py
from typing import ClassVar

class C:
    pure_class_variable1: ClassVar[str] = "value in class body"
    pure_class_variable2: ClassVar = 1

reveal_type(C.pure_class_variable1)  # revealed: str

> # TODO: this should be `Literal[1]`

Reviewer: (valid answers could also include `int`, `Unknown`, `Unknown | Literal[1]` and `Unknown | int`...)

reveal_type(False.real)  # revealed: Literal[0]
```

### Bytes-literal attributes

All attribute access on literal `bytes` types is currently delegated to `buitins.bytes`:

```py
reveal_type(b"foo".join)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)
reveal_type(b"foo".endswith)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)
```

> ## References

Reviewer: is it also worth linking to https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spec/class-compat.html here?

reveal_type(False.real)  # revealed: Literal[0]
```

### Bytes-literal attributes

All attribute access on literal `bytes` types is currently delegated to `buitins.bytes`:

```py
reveal_type(b"foo".join)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)
reveal_type(b"foo".endswith)  # revealed: @Todo(instance attributes)
```

## References

Some of the tests in the *Class and instance variables* section draw inspiration from
[pyright's documentation] on this topic.

[pyright's documentation]: https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/#/type-concepts-advanced?id=class-and-instance-variables

> [typing documentation on `classvar`]: https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/spec/class-compat.html#classvar

Reviewer: nit: this actually links to the spec rather than docs that are meant to be user-facing. (I think that's the correct page for us to link to here but "typing documentation on `classvar`" is maybe a slightly confusing way to describe the page?)

Author: Ahrg, I had "typing spec on …" first, then changed it to documentation after I saw the title of the page. Changing back. The `classvar` thing is done by mdformat. I actually wrote `ClassVar`, but that get's lowercased.
